                             SOUTH AFRICAN
                              ANECDOTES.

                        COLLECTED FROM VARIOUS
                           SOURCES, ORAL AND
                               WRITTEN.

                            _By_ A. ELLMAN.

                             Johannesburg:
              “Transvaal Leader,” corner of Harrison and
                           Anderson Streets.

                                 1914.




                       South African Anecdotes.

          _Collected from various sources, Oral and Written._

                            _By_ A. ELLMAN.


Some forty years ago a schoolmaster was imported from Holland to teach
in the Zoutpansberg District. To their horror, the elders of the
district one day discovered that the children were taught that the
world turns on its own axis. The elders met and consulted regarding
these new doctrines, and finally agreed to refer the subject to the
minister, who requested the schoolmaster to explain. The schoolmaster
said: “I teach them about the heavenly bodies, and that the earth
revolves round the sun.” The minister answered: “Well, this may be
true, no doubt--and what the earth does in Holland, but it would be
more convenient at present if in the Zoutpansberg district you would
allow the sun still to go round the earth for a few years longer. We do
not like sudden changes in such matters.”

       *       *       *       *       *

During the war, some troops marching to the relief of Kimberley halted
at Hanover Road after a weary day’s marching. “Call this Hanover Road!”
exclaimed a Tommy. “I call this h--l of a road.”

       *       *       *       *       *

In the early days at Barberton there was a digger well known as
“Charlie the Reefer.” He was a successful digger, and soon after his
arrival at De Kaap he came into town with a bagful of nuggets, which
he exchanged for sovereigns at the Bank. He then proceeded to the
Landdrost’s office and said to the astonished official that he wished
to deposit ten pounds.

“What is that for?” asked the official.

“To pay my fine.”

Nothing was known of such a fine at the Landdrost’s office. “Oh, that’s
all right,” exclaimed the digger, “I am a careful man; I always pay my
fines in advance. I’m off on a spree, and am sure to get run in, and it
makes me feel more comfortable to know that the fine is provided for.”

       *       *       *       *       *

When Sir Charles Warren first arrived at the Cape, he had with him a
silver presentation plate for Major (afterwards Sir) Owen Lanyon. The
Custom House officials insisted on opening the package containing the
plate, though the invoice stated exactly its nature. Sir Charles says
(in “On the Veld in the Seventies”) that he felt sure they would spoil
it with their rough hands, so he said he would rather knock it into the
sea than have any more bother with it, and gave it a good kick. This
had the desired effect on the Custom House officers. They gave in at
once, saying it could be of no value if he could kick it; and so he got
it through without any injury.

       *       *       *       *       *

Many years ago church services used to be held at Barkley in the
canteen, and on one occasion, in the middle of the sermon, the preacher
noticed that several of those present were smiling. He looked round,
and found he had displaced a blackboard put up as a screen, thereby
disclosing the following notice:--“Free-and-Easy to-night. Gags free.”

       *       *       *       *       *

There was once in the Cape an old miser named Van der Pool. The best
of wines were to be found in his cellars, but no one ever tasted them.
He hated spinach, but since spinach grew in his garden he used to eat
it, being loath to waste it. On one occasion his black cook, Saartje,
brought him a big dish of spinach, rotten with long keeping. What then
happened is given by Miss Juta (“The Cape Peninsula”) in Saartje’s own
words. “Saartje,” say ole Bass, very gentle, soft like, “go fetch me
from die cellar a best big bottle of ole Pontac.”

I run fetch ole Pontac. Ole Basses, he put die bottle just so in front
of him. “Now,” he say, “Saartje, you trek.” I trek no ferder dan die
door keyhole. I see ole Bass pur out best ole Pontac, and put die
spinach in front, too. “Now,” he say, “Hendrik, you see dis fine,
werry, werry, fine ole Pontac, you eat dis verdomte spinach first, den
you drink dis wine, wot’s been standing, Hendrik, kerl, for werry many
years.” Ole Bass, he eat, eat fast as I nebber seen him before; den,
when all spinach done, ole Bass he pour die wine back in die bottle. He
laf, laf, and he say, putting his finger to his nose: “Hi! Hendrick, I
fool you dis time, I think, fool you pretty well.”

       *       *       *       *       *

President Kruger could enjoy a joke, even though directed against
himself. Volksraad Committees often met at the Presidency, on which
occasions they were regaled with coffee and cigars. Once a member
of a Volksraad Committee condoled with Mr. Kruger on his recent
severe financial losses. “What do you mean?” indignantly demanded the
President. “Oh, I am referring to your recent losses on the Stock
Exchange.” The President was now in a fury. “How dare you say that!”
he shouted. “Well, there must be something in it” was the unconcerned
reply. “But I tell you I have not lost a penny in any speculation
whatsoever!” again protested the President, indignantly. “Then how
is it we get no cigars to-day, President,” said the member, with an
injured air. “I beg your pardon, I beg your pardon!” was the answer,
and with a hearty laugh the President himself produced the fragrant
weed.

       *       *       *       *       *

In the pre-war days in the Transvaal many of the higher positions in
the public service were filled by men whose only qualification was that
they were friends of the “powers that were.” An old friend of President
Kruger had fallen on evil days, and came to the President for help. “I
have lost my farm,” he said, “and now you must give me an appointment.”
The President regretted that he could not get him suitable employment
in the service of the State. “But surely there must be some post open
which you can give me,” the applicant pleaded. “Not one,” replied
the President, sorrowfully. “I have tried everywhere. All the chief
positions are filled up; and as to a clerkship, well, you know yourself
you are too stupid for that.”

       *       *       *       *       *

A KAFFIR STORY.--Two Tambookies running from the field of battle hid
themselves in a hole, but the leg of one unfortunately protruding
caught the eye of some wary Icalaca. They pulled him out and were
preparing to slay him, when he cried: “Spare me, and I will tell you
something.” They paused, and he said: “There is yet another man in that
hole.” The second hidden warrior, hearing this, called out from his
place of concealment: “Don’t believe him, kill him at once; he tells
lies, there is no one in here.” But it availed him nothing, and, after
the custom of Kaffirs, the two prisoners were forthwith assegaied.

       *       *       *       *       *

ANOTHER KAFFIR STORY.--Umthonthlo, a native chief, who was the
terror of his neighbours in the seventies, was once buying some guns
from a trader who thought to deceive him. Showing him two guns, the
trader asked the chief what he thought of them. “Oh,” said he, “this
one is a Friday gun, that one is a Monday gun.” When asked to explain,
he said: “Do I not know that all your artisans work well from Tuesday
to Friday, and then all get drunk, and their Monday’s work is worth
nothing at all? Never show me a Monday gun again.”

       *       *       *       *       *

When the Reform prisoners were confined in the Pretoria Gaol they
were frequently visited by the late Mr. B. I. Barnato, and on the
occasion of one of his visits he chaffed them about the position that
they had found themselves in, remarking that they had tried to play
a game of poker with the Transvaal Government on a “Colley Thumper”
hand. None of them had heard of this term before, and Mr. Barnato was
asked to explain. He replied:--An English traveller with a not very
extreme knowledge of poker, found himself on one occasion engaged in a
game with an astute old Yankee on board an American steamer. Playing
cautiously, the Englishman did pretty well until he suddenly found
himself, to his great satisfaction, in possession of a full hand.
The players alternately doubled the stakes until they were raised to
£100. The Englishman then called the American’s hand, and the American
deliberately put down a pair of deuces, a four, a seven, and a nine.
The Englishman, with a triumphant smile, put down his full hand, and
proceeded to gather the stakes. “Stop,” said the Yankee, “the stakes
are mine; yours is only a full hand; mine is a ‘Colley Thumper,’ it
beats everything.” The Englishman had never heard of such a hand
before, but he determined not to show his ignorance, and reluctantly
relinquished the stakes. The game then proceeded until at length the
Englishman found himself in possession of a pair of deuces, a four,
a seven and a nine. Betting went on freely until the stakes were
raised to £500. The Englishman again called, and the Yankee put down
a straight. “Ah,” said the joyful Englishman, “mine is a ‘Colley
Thumper.’” “True,” said the American, “but you forget the rules. It
only counts once in an evening.”

       *       *       *       *       *

The following story illustrates the Kaffir’s love of cattle. A German
trader once presented Panda, King of the Zulus, with a watch. “What is
the use of it?” said he. “To tell where the sun is? We can see it; when
cloudy we remain in our huts; at night we sleep. Does it give milk?”
“No.” “Does it give calves?” “No.” “Then take your watch away.”

       *       *       *       *       *

With certain troops sent to quell a Kaffir rising in the Cape in 1875,
was a staff officer who was wearing one of the recently introduced
spike helmets. On seeing him, an old native said he knew which of the
soldiers would be most successful with the rebels, pointing out the
officer with the helmet, and adding: “A pretty ramming he will give
them.”

       *       *       *       *       *

Years ago, when everything from South Africa was looked upon in England
as strange, an enterprising American conceived the idea of bringing
home a party of Kaffirs to astonish the citizens of London. Very
wisely, instead of going into the wilds to find them, he contented
himself with procuring some Kaffirs in the vicinity of Cape Town,
and having instructed them in native dances and clothed them in the
skin and war-paint of the savage Zulu, he brought them to London. The
“wild” Kaffirs soon became the rage. A Dutch farmer from the Cape,
named De Beer, who was then visiting England, strolled into the hall
in Leicester Square, where the performance was going on. On seeing
him, two of the “wild” Kaffirs rushed from the stage, and, seizing
him by the arm, shouted in Dutch: “Here is old baas De Beer.” De Beer
then discovered that these warlike savages were no other than his own
labourers, who had deserted from his service in the Cape for a reason
which he had never been able to discover.

       *       *       *       *       *

One of the most conspicuous concessionaires before the war was Mr.
Edward Lippert, to whom the dynamite monopoly had been granted. This
circumstance caused a local wit to paraphrase Madame Roland’s famous
exclamation: “Oh, Lippert E., Lippert E., what crimes are committed in
thy name!”

       *       *       *       *       *

President Kruger once accepted an invitation to a Parisian Ball, but no
sooner had he entered the ball-room when he precipitately retreated,
remarking “that they must have come too early, as the ladies were
evidently not dressed yet!”

       *       *       *       *       *

In 1875 there was a police corps in the Cape Colony known as the
Frontier Armed Mounted Police, and the following anecdote is related by
Mr. H. A. Broeme, who was then a member of the Force, in his book, “The
Log of a Rolling Stone.” It was a point of etiquette with the corps
that if an express rider stayed overnight he should be offered the
very best bed in the station, even if the lawful occupant slept on the
floor, but there was a surly trooper who would always decline to extend
this hospitality, although he had by far the best bed, so the other
members determined one day to pay him out. One evening an express rider
came, shortly after which the “surly one” went “down town” by himself,
never offering anything to the tired rider. On his return he was met by
several of his fellow-troopers most apologetically. They were sorry to
inform him that the express rider had got a little bit drunk, and had
turned in, boots and spurs and all, into the surly trooper’s bed. Would
the surly trooper mind? “I call it a blooming piece of presumption,”
said he. “D----d if I’ll have it!” “You surely can’t turn him out now,”
urged the others. “It will discredit the station. Better doss down
alongside on the floor, old chap, till he wakes. Here are some spare
blankets.” This, with considerable reluctance and many oaths, he did,
and it is presumed slept very roughly until after daylight. Then a
fearful yell of rage was heard, and a pair of top boots, a peaked cap
and bolster were seen flying through the air. The sleeping express
rider was a dummy!

       *       *       *       *       *

Discipline was not the strong point of the corps in those easy-going
days. Occasionally, says the same writer, Sir Walter Currie, the
Officer Commanding, would take an inspection tour, but none were more
surprised than he if any of his men were brought up before him for
breach of discipline. A delinquent having once been brought before him
for not having cleaned his troop horse or equipments on saddle parade,
Sir Walter gazed at him absent-mindedly for a minute or so, and then,
turning to the Sergeant-Major, said:--“Sergeant-Major, fine the beggar
half-a-crown.” That was all.

       *       *       *       *       *

A Free Stater was once charged before the Circuit Court with the crime
of murder, and the evidence against him was strong. Now a certain
trader, for commercial reasons, was anxious that the accused should be
discharged, but did not think that this was possible in view of the
evidence, but he thought that a verdict of culpable homicide might
be obtained by a judicious pulling of the strings. A friend of the
trader’s was one of the jurymen, and him he induced to stick out for
a verdict of culpable homicide. At the trial, the foreman, in reply
to the usual question put by the Registrar of the Court, declared
that they were all agreed save one. The jury were then locked up and
remained at their deliberations for three hours, and then the foreman
reported that they had come to an unanimous decision as to the verdict,
which was culpable homicide. On hearing the verdict the trader was
overjoyed, and hastened to congratulate his friend on his smartness in
being able to bring round the rest of the jury to his way of thinking.

“Yes,” said his friend, “it was hard work, I assure you.”

“Why? Were they all against you?”

“Yes, I should think they were. They all wanted to bring in a verdict
of ‘Not Guilty’”.

       *       *       *       *       *

Amongst the pre-war Boer leaders, General De la Rey was one of the
most progressive, whilst his brother Piet, who was a member of the
Volksraad, belonged to the reactionary party. Piet seldom spoke in the
Raad, but on the occasion of the member for Johannesburg presenting a
petition for permission to use the English language in the Courts of
the Rand, he felt it his duty to say a few words. He said:--“English
to be used instead of Dutch in Republican public offices? Never!
Rather than that I would take up my old gun again and trek into the
wilderness, or to fight, as the President wished. Never will I consent
while alive to such an abomination--for”--resuming his seat--“my land
is my land, and my tongue is my tongue!” The General deeply resented
his brother’s speech. Now, Piet de la Rey’s eldest son, Jan, was
a Customs officer on the western frontier, and as such received a
percentage on what he collected, and from him, a few weeks after he
made the above speech, Piet received a letter from Jan expressing fear
“that I may incur great liability, as all the way-bills are in English,
and as you would never let us children learn that language, I have got
to believe what they tell me about them. So, please, father, advise me
what to do.”

Piet consulted the General. The latter read the letter without saying a
word. But Piet pleaded with him to tell him what advice to give to Jan.
“Tell him,” at last replied the General, “that your land is your land,
and your tongue is your tongue!”

       *       *       *       *       *

In the seventies, when Sir Charles Warren was in Kimberley, he had
tea one evening with a Mrs. Barber. There were some nice cakes, and
he ate a good many. Then some more visitors came in, and he went
away. Mrs. Barber was then taking care of a meercat belonging to Sir
Charles. After he had left, and whilst she was feeding the meercat,
she said to her guests: “Bother that brute Warren, he eats such a
lot.” “Of course,” says Sir Charles (in his book “On the Veld in the
Seventies”), it very soon came round to me that Mrs. Barber had called
me a brute because I ate so many of her cakes. I took it as one of the
usual stories afloat, but when I next saw her I told her what had been
imputed to her. At first she was very indignant, but suddenly she said:
“But now I recollect I really did say it. I call the meercat ‘Warren,’
and was abusing it for eating so much!”

       *       *       *       *       *

Mr. “Barney” Barnato once related the following story in the Christmas
number of the “Pelican.” When he first landed in Cape Town, en route
for the Diamond Fields, he put up at the Masonic Hotel. There he met
an individual clad in gorgeous raiment, ornamented with a profusion of
large diamonds, who asked his name and where he was going to, and on
hearing that the Fields were his destination, endeavoured to change his
resolution, saying that he had himself cleared out all the diamonds
that were there. Of course, “Barney” was a little cast down at this,
but still stuck to his determination to see for himself. Years after
he met the same stranger in Johannesburg. The stranger asked him how
he managed to become chairman of the De Beers Company. “By not taking
your advice,” was the prompt reply. The story was afterwards classed
by its author amongst his many successful works of fiction.

       *       *       *       *       *

Once a well-known individual borrowed £10 from Mr. Barnato at
Johannesburg, and, although asked for the money several times, always
put off payment. One day “between the chains” Barnato said openly to
some friends:--“Mind you don’t lend ---- any money. He has £10 of mine,
and it is time he was stopped.” The man heard of this, and coming up
to him said:--“I hear you have been talking about me?” “Yes; I want my
money.” “Well, here is your £10, and don’t talk about me any more.” A
short time afterwards the same man asked Barnato for £25. “No, can’t
do it,” was the reply. “Why not? I don’t owe you anything.” “I know
you don’t, but you’ve disappointed me once, and I won’t risk another
disappointment.”

       *       *       *       *       *

About the year 1877, Sir Charles Warren was travelling in a post-cart
from Cape Town to Kimberley and had as a fellow-passenger a very
taciturn young man who was diligently studying his prayer-book.
Warren’s curiosity was roused, but, being of a reserved nature, said
nothing. Eventually his curiosity overcame his reserve, and he asked
the young man what he was reading. “The Thirty-nine Articles” was the
reply, and in this manner the two got to know each other. The young
man was Cecil Rhodes, on his way back from Oxford to Kimberley for
the long vacation, and he was characteristically using his time in
the post-cart before he plunged again into the midst of diamonds and
finance, in learning the Thirty-nine Articles for his next examination
at Oxford.

       *       *       *       *       *

Early in the eighties General Gordon was employed by the Cape
Government (of which the late Mr. Sauer was then a member as Secretary
for Native Affairs) to go to Basutoland to arrange terms of peace with
the Basutos. Rhodes was also in Basutoland at that time, and the two
men saw a good deal of each other. During one of their conversations,
Gordon said to Rhodes:--“You always contradict me. I never met such
a man for his own opinion. You think your views are always right and
everyone else wrong.” Rhodes determined to get his own back. Noticing
that the Basutos were making much of Gordon and very little of Sauer,
he said to Gordon:--“Do you know, I have an opinion that you are
doing very wrong. You are letting these Basutos make a great mistake.
They take you for a great man, look up to you, and pay no attention
to Sauer, whereas he is the great man here, and you are only in his
employment. You ought to explain to the Basutos the truth, that he is
somebody and you are nobody.” This was said jokingly, but Gordon took
it quite seriously. At the next indaba, accordingly, Gordon stepped
out before the chiefs, and, pointing to Mr. Sauer, explained, to their
astonishment:--“You are making a mistake in taking me for the great
man of the Whites. I am only his servant, only his dog; nothing more.”
After the indaba was over, he said to Rhodes:--“I did it because it was
the right thing--but it was hard, very hard.”

       *       *       *       *       *

General Gordon once told Mr. Rhodes the story of the offer of a roomful
of gold which had been made to him by the Chinese Government after he
had subdued the Tai-Ping rebellion. “What did you do?” asked Rhodes.
“Refused it, of course; what would you have done?” “I would have taken
it,” said Rhodes, “and as many more roomfuls as they would give me. It
is of no use for us to have big ideas if we have not the money to carry
them out.”

       *       *       *       *       *

When Dr. Jameson was Administrator of Rhodesia, he was one afternoon
lying on his bed in his tent, when a burly, drunken prospector suddenly
lurched inside, and, drawing his revolver, said:--“You are a good old
doctor, but I am b----y well going to shoot you.” Jameson remained
motionless (says his biographer, Mr. G. Seymour Fort), puffed a whiff
of cigarette smoke through his lips, and coolly replied:--“Yes, that’s
all right, but don’t you think you had better have a drink first?” The
man agreed. Jameson called his servant and told him to take the man
to the canteen, at the same time pointing with his finger not to the
canteen but to the police camp. Off went the prospector, quite pleased,
but soon discovered the ruse. A desperate struggle took place, the
servant was thrown heavily to the ground, and the prospector was only
just overtaken by the police as he was re-entering the tent, revolver
in hand, and black murder in his heart.

       *       *       *       *       *

When Cecil Rhodes was at Oxford, he looked so little like an Oxonian
that he was able to deceive even the Proctor. “The Proctor,” related
Mr. Rhodes, “took off his cap to me with the utmost politeness, and I
did the same to him. ‘Well, sir,’ said the Proctor to me, ‘your name
and college?’ ‘My name is Rhodes,’ I replied, ‘and I have just come
here from the Cape of Good Hope, and am making a short stay in Oxford;
and now, sir, may I ask your name and college?’” Whereupon the Proctor
apologised for what he supposed to be his mistake, and Cecil Rhodes
escaped unfined.

       *       *       *       *       *

Mr. Louis Cohen, one of Mr. Barney Barnato’s earliest partners on
the Diamond Fields, says that there was one man on the Fields whose
business they both envied. He seemed to have a regular and large
connection, and made constant rounds, riding one old yellow, rather
lame, pony. The partners tried to follow him to see which way he went,
but without avail. One day Barnato said to Cohen: “That chap ---- has
a rare good connection; we must get hold of a bit of it somehow.” “All
right,” said Mr. Cohen, “we want it badly enough.” “I know what we have
to do to get ----’s customers. I have seen him come home three days
running.” Mr. Cohen thought Mr. Barnato was fooling, and replied rather
sharply:--“If you had seen him go out and followed him up it would have
been more to the purpose, I should think.” But Barnato soon convinced
him that he was quite serious. “Look here,” said he, “I’ve seen him
come back from his rounds three days running, and he always stops first
at Hall’s canteen. Mind this, however, he does not guide the pony to
the place, but just sits still all the while with loose rein, and the
pony stops of his own accord. Now, it is my firm conviction that all
day long he rides just the same way, and that the pony knows all the
stopping places. I’ve known this for some days, but it didn’t help so
long as he had the pony; to-day he has seen some other beast he likes
better, and wants to sell the lame pony.” The partners bought the
pony, with the successful results anticipated by Barnato. “I wonder,”
says Mr. Cohen, “whether any other man than Barnato would have been
so closely observant as to notice that the pony finished his rounds
without guidance and so probably knew all the usual stopping places of
each day.”

       *       *       *       *       *

In his biography of Mr. B. I. Barnato, Mr. Seymour says that one
evening Mr. Barnato and Mr. Louis Cohen went to the Court Theatre,
London. No seats had been booked; Barnato, as usual, had no money on
him, and Louis Cohen had only a sovereign. Barnato borrowed this,
saying that he would engineer the other shilling for their stalls
somehow. Under the portico of the theatre was a man not quite blind,
but with defective sight, who solicited charity. Barnato turned to
Cohen and said:--“Do you mind, Lou, if we go to the circle instead
of the stalls?” “Oh, no; just as you please.” Barnato then went to
the office and asked for two circle seats. “Very sorry, sir, but all
are gone. I can give you two side stalls if they will do.” A huge
smile broke over Barnato’s face. “I have not come prepared to pay for
stalls,” said he. “Very well, sir. You can have stalls for circle
prices.” Barnato took his vouchers for the seats, went out to the man,
gave him the whole five shillings change, and, turning to Cohen, said:
“Now that is what I call finance.”

       *       *       *       *       *

This is how Kimberley acquired its name. In 1871 the farm “Vooruitzigt”
was proclaimed as a diamond digging. This name was declared by
Lord Kimberley, then Secretary of State for the Colonies, to be
unpronounceable. Some one then suggested the name “New Rush.” This Lord
Kimberley declared to be too suggestive of rowdiness. Some one else
then suggested that the town should be called after the Minister. This
was adopted, and so the town was christened Kimberley.

       *       *       *       *       *

Mr. Rhodes was very careless about trifling personal matters. There
was a function in connection with the Kimberley Exhibition at which
he was taking a leading part. When he arrived at the gates of the
Exhibition, he found he had mislaid his pass, and the gatekeeper, not
knowing him, refused him admission. Putting his hand into his pocket,
Mr. Rhodes enquired the price of admission. “Two shillings,” replied
the gatekeeper. Mr. Rhodes then discovered that he hadn’t any money
about him. “I am afraid I have left my purse behind,” he said, “but
I suppose my watch will do.” He then discovered that he had mislaid
his watch also, and told the gatekeeper who he was. That functionary,
however, was unconvinced, and it is probable that Mr. Rhodes would
not have gained admission to the Exhibition had not some one lent him
the required florin. Mr. Rhodes subsequently sent the gatekeeper five
pounds as a reward for having so unhesitatingly done his duty.

       *       *       *       *       *

Mr. Stuart Cumberland, in his book, “What I think of South Africa,”
relates the following anecdote about “Barney” Barnato:

   “I was a witness,” he says, “of a little joke Barney played
   upon a very august corporation. He was asked to write upon a
   form his name, place of residence and occupation. Down went the
   first, ‘B. I. Barnato,’ then ‘Spencer House,’ but when he came
   to occupation he hesitated. ‘How shall I describe myself?’ he
   asked. ‘Gentleman? no, that’s too elastic.’ ‘Dramatic author,’
   I meekly suggested. (Barnato was then working at a play with
   Haddon Chambers). ‘That might do,’ he said, ‘only we should
   have Haddon Chambers saying I wasn’t, and then how should I
   stand? I have it--_toff_.’ And down went ‘toff’ on the
   paper. Presently the form came back with the enquiry what ‘toff’
   meant. ‘Oh,’ replied Barnato, with an imperturbable countenance,
   ‘that’s the Hebrew for financial gentleman.’”

       *       *       *       *       *

When the synagogue of the Johannesburg Hebrew Congregation was
built, President Kruger was invited to perform the opening ceremony.
He accepted the invitation, but the amazement of the hundreds of
Israelites present may be imagined when the President announced, in his
loudest tones:--“In the name of the Lord Jesus Christ, I declare this
building open.”

       *       *       *       *       *

Mr. Rhodes was very fond of discussing the various points of English
politicians, and there was one member of the Gladstone Government
of 1892 whom he cordially detested. He told me once, says Sir Lewis
Michell, how he found himself seated next him at a dinner-party in
London, and was so bored with him that in the middle of one of his
arguments on some political problem he turned away from him and began
talking to his other neighbour. “It was very rude of me, I know,” he
said, “very rude. People who live in London can’t do these things--I
can. I can do it on the basis of a barbarian!”

       *       *       *       *       *

An old pioneer, invalided from Rhodesia by fever once called on Mr.
Rhodes at Groote Schuur for relief. Out of work, out at elbows, and
reduced to a pitiable state from privation, he was about to venture to
state his case, when, to his inexpressible delight, he was hailed by
name. Rhodes had recognised him, despite all changes. Putting his hand
on the man’s shoulder, Rhodes said:--“Not a word, a good square meal
first!” And to the kitchen he took him for that purpose, telling him to
return to the stoep afterwards. He then heard his story, and gave him
an order on his secretary in town to give him money for what clothes he
wanted, and telling him to return the next day, which he did. He found
Rhodes in a passion. “You only took ten shillings,” he cried. The man
had been ashamed to ask for more. Rhodes at once took him to town in
his own cart, went himself to the outfitters, completely clothed him,
gave him money and a free pass back to his work. “I never,” he said,
“forget an old face.”

       *       *       *       *       *

An officer of the Cape garrison purchased a pair of leopards, and
requested permission to bring them into his quarters in the Castle,
but, as there were many young children in the barracks at the time,
he was refused. He therefore left them in charge of a Malay in the
neighbourhood. On going to claim them, the Malay said to him, much to
the officer’s consternation:--“There are the pair,” pointing to one
animal,“but one has eaten the other.”

       *       *       *       *       *

The ignorance of colonial affairs formerly displayed in England is
illustrated by the story of a War Office official who desired to
know the reason why the chaplain at Grahamstown could not perform
his evening service at Kingwilliamstown, being, presumably, entirely
ignorant of the fact that the two towns are ninety miles asunder.

       *       *       *       *       *

During the Boer War of 1881, when Pretoria was under martial law, a
certain garrison officer was summoned upon two boards of enquiry--one
referring to the case of a sick soldier, and the other to an attack of
glanders in a horse. Mistaking the board when called in to give his
opinion as to what was best to be done, he horrified the Court by
advising them “to shoot him at once!”

       *       *       *       *       *

Mr. Rhodes was once accused of changing his views rather hurriedly.
“Yes,” he replied, “as hurriedly as I could, for I found I was wrong.”

       *       *       *       *       *

Once, when twitted with his preference for young men, Mr. Rhodes
retorted:--“Of course, of course, they must soon take up our work; we
must teach them what to do and what to avoid.”

       *       *       *       *       *

On another occasion, his sentimental attachment to the Boers was the
matter of a jest. “They were the voortrekkers,” he replied, “the real
pioneers. They have always led the way. It is your business to see that
the flag follows.”

       *       *       *       *       *

In 1881, during the visit of a showman named Duval to Kimberley, the
following conversation between a country Dutchman and a town Dutchman
was overheard on the market square of that town:--“What large bills are
those on the walls?” asked the former. “Oh,” was the reply, “that is
the advertisement of Duval, and Kimberley people go and see him every
night.” The countryman expressed his abhorrence of “de duivel,” and
declared he would not visit his Satanic Majesty’s play. The townsman
then explained himself, but unfortunately added a description of the
sudden metamorphoses effected by the actor. The countryman then put
down his foot and raised his hand, declaring:--“Nu weet ek dat hij de
duivel is; mij Bijbel zeg net zo van hem. Ik zal nooit om zo’n ding
zien.” A free translation of which is:--“Now I know he is the devil; my
Bible speaks of him just so. I will never go to such a thing.”

       *       *       *       *       *

Mr. Rhodes once received a letter from an educated native, which
contained the following passage:--

“I never forgotten the well-treatment I received from you at
Queenstown. I consider you my father, and beg to inform you that I want
to come and work for you at Cape Town.”

It is evident, says Sir Lewis Michell, that employment was given, for
the letter is endorsed, in the handwriting of Rhodes:--“The faithful
native! He worked a week, but found household duties beneath his
dignity.”

       *       *       *       *       *

There is a certain type of man in South Africa whose cry is: “Ah, you
should have seen it before the war!” When the British Association paid
their visit to South Africa a few years ago, and were admiring the
beauties of the Southern Cross, a pre-war resident coming up gloomily
from behind, cried: “Ah, you should have seen it before the war!”

       *       *       *       *       *

Sir Bartle Frere once visited a farm owned by a man named Oberholzer,
with whom he had a long conversation, astronomy being amongst the
subjects discussed. Having explained that the planets shining above
them were worlds like ours and composed of rocks and minerals much the
same, Oberholzer pointed to the moon and expressed the opinion that,
although it might contain many valuable minerals, he was sure there
were no diamonds there.

“Why do you think that?” asked Sir Bartle Frere.

“Because,” replied the farmer, “if there were diamonds there you
English would have annexed it long ago.” (At that period the dispute
over the annexation of Griqualand West with its Diamond Fields had only
just been settled.)

       *       *       *       *       *

In 1896, whilst Rhodes was returning from England to South Africa by
the eastern route, he decided to interview the Sultan of Turkey for
the purpose of getting some stud Angora goats from him in order to
endeavour to effect an improvement in the South African herds, which,
owing to in-breeding and neglect, had deteriorated very greatly. His
friends laughed at him, and said he could not possibly succeed; they
even said: “You will not as much as be granted an interview.” “Well,”
he replied, “I shall try, and if I fail it will be some satisfaction to
know I have made an attempt.” The services of Sir Phillip Currie, as
he then was, the British Ambassador at Constantinople, were enlisted
on his behalf, and to his delight an interview was arranged for the
following morning. About 10 a.m. the next day, he turned up at the
Palace in his ordinary garb--a suit of flannel--and was met there by
the Ambassador, whose face fell very much on seeing his costume. “Good
gracious,” he said, “you can’t go to see the Sultan like that; you must
go and get your frock coat.” “That is impossible,” replied Mr. Rhodes,
“for I don’t possess one.” In the end a compromise was effected by
his taking off his flannel jacket and squeezing into the Ambassador’s
overcoat, which was very much too small for him. He met the Sultan,
who was much taken with him, and agreed to let him have a considerable
number of his Angoras, the benefit of which South Africa is reaping
to-day.

       *       *       *       *       *

When Sir George Grey was Governor of the Cape Colony he had occasion to
travel up-country in a Cape cart, and on the road stopped at a wayside
inn for breakfast. The bill for half-a-dozen boiled eggs and the same
number of cups of tea was two pounds ten shillings. As the party were
taking their seats in the Cape cart again Sir George observed to
mine host “that eggs must be scarce on that line.” “Your Excellency,”
observed the innkeeper, “eggs is plentiful. It is Governors that is
scarce on this road.”

       *       *       *       *       *

During one of the Matabele wars, Cecil Rhodes was lying down by his
wagon, reading a book, his companions having left him for some purpose
or other, when a trooper came across from the laager and said, “Good
day.” “Good day” replied Rhodes. “Have you got any fish?” asked the
man. Rhodes tumbled to the situation at once. “No,” said he, “I am
sorry to say I’ve got no fish.” “Got no _fish_,” said the trooper,
“have you got any _jam_?” “No,” replied Rhodes, “I’m sorry to say
I’m out of jam.” “You’ve got no fish, and got no jam; what _have_
you got?” said the man. “You may as well ask that,” said Rhodes, “I’ve
got precious little left, and what I have got they are trying to take
away from me as fast as they can.” “I am sorry for that,” said the
man, “but (looking at some six or eight books lying on the ground)
you’ve got some books, I see, and (picking up one on Buddism) pretty
deep subjects, too!” “Well,” said Rhodes, “I certainly do read a bit,
that’s my recreation. You see, it’s pretty hard work selling fish
and jam _all_ day.” “I should think it must be,” said the man.
“Well, I’m sorry for you, for you’re a civil-spoken kind of chap, and
I’m still more sorry that you’ve got no fish or jam, but it can’t be
helped--good day.” “Good day,” said Rhodes, and the man went back to
the laager. One wonders, says Sir Lewis Michell, in narrating this
anecdote, what the man’s feelings were when he saw Rhodes riding with
Plumer the next morning at the head of the column, and discovered that
the man he had mistaken for a purveyor of tinned stores to the troops
was the greatest Englishman of modern times.

       *       *       *       *       *

About thirty years ago, a certain Cape Governor had occasion to visit a
small dorp in the northern part of the Cape Colony. This dorp consisted
of about a dozen houses, mostly built of tin, but an enormous area of
hill, vale and plain spread around it on every side. At the end of the
address which was presented by the Mayor and Corporation, there was a
request that the Governor might be pleased to sanction an allotment
from the revenue of the Colony of some thousands sterling for the
purpose of carrying out a complete system of municipal drainage. One of
the houses composing the town stood on a broad eminence; the remaining
structures occupied detached points in a rather swampy valley. “I
wondered what he would say,” says Sir William Butler, who was present
on the occasion in question as a member of the Governor’s staff,
“when the time came for the Governor to reply.” “Gentlemen,” said the
Governor, after thanking the municipality, “I entirely sympathise
with you in your natural desire to have your promising town placed
in a position in regard to its drainage and sanitary conditions which
will enable it to fulfil the requirements of its undoubted future,
but the scheme you propose would be a costly one, and the finances of
the Colony are not for the moment too redundant. Would it not be less
expensive if we were to move the town up to the top of that hill where
the single house now stands. It would then practically drain itself.”

       *       *       *       *       *

Once there was a slump in Johannesburg, and a deputation from the Rand
went to interview President Kruger in Pretoria. “Times are bad,” they
said, and it was not their fault. The Government must do something for
them. Oom Paul listened in silence, smoking. At last he took his pipe
from his mouth, and replied: “Gentlemen, you remind me of a pet monkey
I once had. He was very fond of me; he would never leave me alone.
When anything happened that he did not like, he always ran to me. One
winter’s night he was at my feet by the fire. Monkeys never sit quiet
for long, and he kept twisting himself round about until at last he got
his tail into the fire. He did it himself, gentlemen; I didn’t even
know he was doing it, but all the same he turned and bit me in the leg.”

       *       *       *       *       *

A certain smouser once visited a farmer, bought his wool, and after
the wool had been weighed and the price per pound fixed, the smouser
said: “So many pounds at so much comes to so much,” mentioning a sum
about half the actual total. “No,” said the farmer, “it should be
so much,” stating the real figure, and, to the smouzer’s amazement,
produced a ready reckoner! With an air of surprise, the smouser said:
“Let’s look at that book.” The farmer handed the book to the smouser
and triumphantly pointed out the place. The smouser looked at the
calculation, then turned to the title page and pointing to the date of
publication, exclaimed, with an exultant laugh: “Why, you’ve got hold
of last year’s ready reckoner,” and actually convinced the farmer that
he had been swindled, not by the smouser, but by the man who had sold
him the book!

       *       *       *       *       *

A certain Frenchman, on hearing the news of the relief of Kimberley by
General French, exclaimed: “Bon! Fashoda finds itself avenged. Behold,
ze English are in the ze consomme, for ze French are in Kimberley.”

       *       *       *       *       *

During the Zulu War of 1878, a Zulu spy was captured by some members
of an irregular corps. The Sergeant-Major of the corps asked the O.C.
what should be done with the spy. The officer at that particular moment
was suffering from an injured shin and, being in a bad temper in
consequence, replied shortly: “Oh, hang the bally spy!” Subsequently
a court-martial was summoned to try the spy, and the Sergeant-Major
was ordered to march up the prisoner. The Sergeant-Major, who was an
Irishman, stared open-mouthed for a few seconds, and then said: “Plaze,
sor, I can’t, sure, he’s hung, sor.” “Hung!” exclaimed the Commandant,
who was standing within ear-shot. “Who ordered him to be hung?” “The
O.C., sor,” replied the Sergeant-Major. “I ordered him to be hung?”
then ejaculated the O.C., who was also present. “What do you mean?”
“Shure, sor, when I asked you what was to be done with the spy, did you
not say, sor, ‘Oh, hang the spoy,’ and there he is,” pointing to the
slaughter poles, and sure enough there he was. The court-martial was
postponed _sine die_.

       *       *       *       *       *

In 1879, when Field-Marshal Sir Evelyn Wood--then Colonel Evelyn
Wood--was in command of the column then encamped at Kambulu, in
Natal, a trader came into the camp with wagons and asked permission
to sell groceries to the troops. Permission was granted to him on the
understanding that he had no alcohol of any description. It was later
discovered that he was selling gin to the soldiers at a shilling a
glass, and Colonel Wood executed summary justice by having the trader
tied to the wheel of his own wagon and giving him two dozen lashes.
A few weeks later Colonel Wood received a summons issued on behalf
of the trader, claiming damages to the tune of £5,000. This summons
he ignored. “Some time afterwards,” says Sir Evelyn Wood, in “From
Midshipman to Field Marshal,” “I was riding one morning into Utrecht
when I met a horseman, who, stopping me, asked if he was on the right
road to Colonel Wood’s camp, and also whether the road was safe. I told
him he was quite safe until he got to Balte Spruit. ‘What sort of a man
is this Colonel Wood?’ he asked. ‘Well,’ I replied, ‘some people like
him and some people dislike him.’ ‘I have been told that he is very
rough.’ ‘Yes, that is so--when he is vexed.’ ‘I am an officer of the
High Court of the Transvaal, and I am going to him with a writ; do you
think he will be violent with me?’ ‘Oh, no, I am certain he won’t.’
‘Then you think there is no risk so far as he is concerned?’ ‘None
whatever; but you had better not mention your business in the camp, as
his own battalion is at Kambulu Hill, and it might be bad for you if
the men got to know your errand.’ ‘Why, what do you think they will do
to me--kill me?’ ‘Oh, no; the worst that would happen to you would be
to be tarred and feathered.’ ‘I don’t like this job that I am on. I
think, if you will allow me, I’d like to turn back and ride with you
to Utrecht and send the document by post.’ Accordingly we rode along
together, and I showed him the post office in the little town before I
went about my business.”

       *       *       *       *       *

When Mark Twain visited South Africa, he was asked by an eminent
Africander what he thought of South African affairs. “Well,” replied
Mark Twain, “after I had been in Cape Town a week and had heard both
sides of the question, I thought I had mastered it. Then I went to
Kimberley, and met with a totally different view. Up in Bulawayo there
was quite another story, and in Johannesburg a different opinion was
heard, while in Pretoria I might as well have been in another country.
When I reached Bloemfontein----” “Yes?” said the eminent Africander,
“what conclusion did you come to?” “Well,” said Mark Twain, “the only
conclusion I could arrive at was that the South African question was a
very good subject for a fool to let alone.”

       *       *       *       *       *

A shooting story told by Mr. Carl Jeppe in “The Keleidoscopic
Transvaal.” Mr. D. S. Mare, magistrate of Zoutpansberg, was out lion
shooting with the late Barend Vorster, a mighty hunter before the
Lord. A lioness had been wounded, driven out of cover, and stood at
bay. The landdrost jumped off his horse, fired, and missed. It was now
Vorster’s turn, since there was not time for his friend to reload.
In dismounting, Vorster dropped his watch and stopped to pick it up.
The lioness seemed about to charge, and Mare urged his friend to
shoot. Vorster replied grumblingly that the glass of his watch had
been broken. “Never mind that now; the lioness is ready to spring,”
Mare replied. “Do you know,” said Vorster, “I shall have to send the
watch to Pretoria, and that it will cost me five shillings to get it
repaired?” “Good heavens,” cried the magistrate, “don’t you see you
have not a moment to loose?” “It’s all very well for you to talk,”
Vorster replied; “it’s not your watch that is broken!” At last,
however, he fired, and with unerring aim gave the lioness the _coup
de grace_.

       *       *       *       *       *

The following is an exact copy of a letter written by a half-educated
Kaffir in the De Beers Diamond Mine Compound to his sweetheart
outside:--

Dear Miss Judea Moses,--My dear, I am take this lettle time of write
you this few lines hoping that it will find you in a good state of
health, as it leaves me here in the Compound My dear Girl I am very
sorry that you did not write my ansert back My dear Judea Moses be so
kind and let me know how it is with you my dear girl I mean to say you
must cry out and shout thou in the habitant of Zion, for great is the
holy one of israel My dear Miss Judea i glided by lawns and grassy
plots My dear friend please andswer me as soon as you get this letter
My dear oft in sadness or in illness I have watched thy current glide
till the beauty of its stillness overflowed me like a tide I steal
my lawns and grassy plots I slide by hazel covers i move the sweet
forget-me-nots that grow for happy lovers My dear darling miss J.
Moses Here I shall drup writing with Best loves good By 2222 kisses to
youe.

       *       *       *       *       *

Two middies, many years ago, returning to Simonstown from Cape Town,
where they had been on a jaunt, arrived one dark night at Muizenburg.
It was too late and too dark to continue their journey, so they put up
at an inn known as “Father Peck’s.” When the bill was presented to them
the following morning they discovered they had no money. “We’ll paint
you a signboard,” they said to the landlord. This they did, adding the
following lines:--

    Multum in parvo, pro bono publico,
    Entertainment for man and beast all of a row.
    Lekker kost as much as you please,
    Excellent beds without any fleas.
    Nos patriam fugimus now we are here,
    Vivamus, let us live by selling beer.
    On donne a boire et a manger ici,
    Come in and try, whatsoever you be.

       *       *       *       *       *

“Piet, my vrouw” is the name of a well-known South African bird,
which owes its name to the following incident:--Le Vaillant, the
French traveller, and a Hottentot named Piet, were out shooting, and
Le Vaillant shot and killed a female bird. Piet brought up the bird.
“Go back,” said the Frenchman, “to the spot where you found this
bird, for surely there you will find its mate.” Piet weepingly asked
to be excused. “Please, Baas, I cannot fire at the male bird.” “Go--I
insist!” said Le Vaillant. “No, no, Baas!” pleaded Piet. “And why not?”
demanded Le Vaillant. “Well, Baas,” explained Piet, “no sooner did I
shoot the female when the male bird began to pursue me with great fury,
continually repeating, ‘Piet, mij vrouw! Piet, mij vrouw!’”

       *       *       *       *       *

In 1883 Judge Burgers was presiding over the Circuit Court at
Lydenburg, when the proceedings were interrupted by the persistent
crowing of a cock in the neighbourhood of the Court. The judge was
visibly annoyed, but took no action for some time. The crowing,
however, becoming more persistent, he stopped the proceedings and
ordered the Sheriff to bring the offending bird before the Bench. This
was done, and the learned judge, with due solemnity, sentenced the bird
to death for contempt of court. The sentence was immediately carried
into effect by the Sheriff wringing the creature’s neck.

       *       *       *       *       *

There was once a landdrost whose knowledge of law was very small. On
one occasion an attorney practising in his Court quoted Van der Linden.

“Who was he?” asked the landdrost.

“A great authority on Roman-Dutch Law,” was the reply.

“That law may do for his Court,” replied the landdrost solemnly, “but I
wish you to understand that I am landdrost here.”

       *       *       *       *       *

Sir Christopher Brand, Speaker of the Cape Parliament, and father
of Sir John Brand, President of the Free State, was noted for his
parsimoniousness. Early one morning Sir Christopher came to the
telegraph office at Paarl Station to send a wire ordering the arrest
of a man who was subsequently hanged for an atrocious wife murder. The
clerk in charge was Mr. David MacKay Wilson, who afterwards became a
prominent official in the service of the South African Republic, and
the author of “Behind the Scenes in the Transvaal.” Mr. Wilson counted
the words and announced that the cost of the message would be four
shillings and six pence. Sir Christopher replied that he had no money
on him, but would pay later. The office regulation as to pre-payment
was inflexible, and was not to be relaxed. “I told him so,” says Mr.
Wilson, “whereupon he used his persuasive eloquence upon me to such
effect that I weakly consented to pay for the message out of my own
slender salary.” And although Mr. Wilson made several attempts to
obtain payment of the sum advanced by him, he was not successful in
doing so. Four years afterwards, Mr. Wilson was stationmaster at Durban
Road, and one day he was called upon by a gentleman to open the door
of one of the carriages. He immediately recognised Sir Christopher,
and in a spirit half-jocular, half-serious, reminded him of his debt.
Sir Christopher ignored the reminder and demanded to be released, as
it was imperative that he should see some one on the station. Mr.
Wilson replied that he would not open the door until he received his
four and sixpence. At this moment the train was moved on for shunting
purposes, and the old Knight remained gesticulating and threatening at
the window. On returning to the platform, Mr. Wilson approached the
carriage and repeated his demand, when his peppery debtor consigned
him to perdition, adding that he did not now require to get out, as it
was too late. “I never got my four and six,” says Mr. Wilson, “but I
forgive him the debt, feeling satisfied that I had got even with him.”

       *       *       *       *       *

Curious to relate, a member of the Brand family was once the cause of
a catastrophe to Mr. Wilson. Sir John Brand and his suite were passing
in a special train to Cape Town on his memorable visit to England.
The regulations required that on such occasions the stationmaster
should himself hold the Lever controlling the points. Mr. Wilson had
just taken his position, when, looking in the direction of the fast
approaching train, he saw to his horror his eighteen months old child
sitting on the line playing with a piece of paper. Mr. Wilson left his
position and went to the rescue. The train passed the points safely,
and few but himself knew the horror that had been so narrowly escaped.
The traffic manager, however, who accompanied the train, noticed that
the points were unattended, and a few hours later Mr. Wilson was
formally suspended by a telegraph message. An enquiry was held, at
which Mr. Wilson pleaded guilty, and asked the chairman what he would
have done under the circumstances. “I should have done as you did,” was
the frank reply, and Mr. Wilson was acquitted and reinstated.

       *       *       *       *       *

When the scheme of supplying water to Johannesburg from the farm
Wonderfontein was first mooted, the surrounding farmers protested
against the scheme, urging that if the water were diverted from the
river which runs on the farm they would suffer. It may be stated
that there is a river which disappears into the earth on that farm.
President Kruger was very desirous that the Wonderfontein scheme should
go through, and, in order to prove to the farmers that they were
mistaken in the assumption that Wonderfontein was the source whence
they derived their water supply, he ordered a sackful of corks to be
emptied into the well-like cave down which “Wonderfontein” disappears.
“If this stream does come out on your farms,” said he, “the corks must
come with it.” Of course, not a single cork was ever seen again, and
the farmers were convinced and withdrew their opposition to the scheme.
It is suggested that President Kruger well knew when he proposed the
test that at the outlet of the stream was far below its surface, the
corks would never pass through, but remain floating in the well.

       *       *       *       *       *

A young Hollander was, many years ago, appointed to a landdrostship
in the country. He had no qualifications for the post, and was
unacquainted with even the most rudimentary principles of Court
procedure. Some wag pointed out to him that a great blunder had been
perpetrated by his predecessor, inasmuch as there was no box for the
prisoner in the Court, and it was pointed out to him that as the
prisoner was always referred to as the “prisoner in the box,” if
he was not in a box the conviction must fall to the ground through
informality. The legal luminary on the Bench was not going to take any
risks; he caused a gin case to be placed in the centre of the Court,
and in that all prisoners or civil defendants had to stand before the
business was proceeded with.

       *       *       *       *       *

The following story illustrates how very distrustful some Boers are of
modern customs. A widow named Erasmus sold some farms to a financial
firm for £110,000 cash. It was agreed that she should receive the
money at the Pretoria branch of the National Bank. In due course
she presented herself at the Bank, bringing with her a hand-bag to
hold the money. When a cheque for the amount was handed to her, she
returned it, saying that she had not travelled all the way to Pretoria
for a piece of paper, and insisted on all the money being paid to her
in gold. As all arguments proved unavailing, the manager agreed to
let her have her own way. A bagful of sovereigns was emptied on the
counter, and the old lady began to count them. She continued to do so
for several hours, when she was informed she could not remain on the
premises as the bank doors were to be closed; but she was obdurate, and
refused to leave as she had only counted one thousand sovereigns, and
feared that she would not see the balance of her money if she waited
till the following day. At last the manager sent for Mr. T. W. Beckett,
the well-known Pretoria merchant, thinking that the latter, being well
acquainted with the farmers and their ways, would be able to convince
her of her folly. Mr. Beckett was, however, not more successful than
the manager. Mr. Beckett then offered his personal guarantee to pay her
the money next day. This she accepted, preferring it to the security of
the National Bank.

       *       *       *       *       *

When Mr. B. I. Barnato was a member of the Cape Parliament, he took
part in a discussion on the Cape Liquor Law, which prohibits the sale
of liquor on Sunday, unless the customer at the same time has a bona
fide meal. In the course of his remarks he said:--“A few Sundays ago
I walked some distance from Cape Town, for, being busily engaged in
mentally reviewing the course of business of this Honourable House, I
went on much further than I had intended without noticing the time.
I at length retraced my steps, and being then both hot and thirsty,
went into a decent and most respectable hotel for refreshment. I only
wanted to quench my thirst, but, according to law, a drink could only
be supplied as the accompaniment to a bona fide substantial meal. Mine
host set before me a bottle of beer and a leg of roast pork. He had no
other eatables. What was I to do? If I ate the pork, I broke the law of
Moses, if I drank the beer without eating, I broke the law of the land.
Between the Chief Rabbi and the Chief Justice I stood in a very awkward
position.”

       *       *       *       *       *

Sir Starr Jameson’s power of inspiring affection amongst those with
whom he has been brought into contact is exemplified in the following
anecdote. His biographer (Mr. G. Seymour Fort), three days after
the Raid, was buying fruit from a stall in Pretoria, and selected a
particular bunch of grapes. “No, sir,” the woman replied, “you can’t
have that; I am keeping the best I have for Dr. Jim,” and she went on
to explain that he had cured her daughter in Kimberley, and that no
sacrifice was too great for his sake.

Mr. Edmund Garrett tells a similar story of a groom who asked him for
news of Dr. Jameson. Mr. Garrett said to him: “You seem to be greatly
interested in Dr. Jameson.” “Interested!” said the groom. “Whatsoever
‘quod’ he gets, I’d gladly do half of it for him--that I would.”
“This groom,” says Mr. Garrett, “had once broken his leg in a race at
Kimberley, and the doctor had attended him in hospital. That was all.”

       *       *       *       *       *

Times have changed, but there was a time when the average Boer was
unable to realise the magnitude of large figures. The representative of
a Johannesburg syndicate was negotiating for the purchase of a farm in
the Ventersdorp district. The owner asked for a preposterous sum. The
financier then suggested that the amount of the purchase price should
be as much gold as would cover a certain table in the room. To this
proposal the farmer gladly agreed, and the financier covered the table
with £12,000 in gold. This the farmer accepted, although the amount was
about a quarter of the amount originally asked for.

       *       *       *       *       *

When the Dutch East India Company ruled at the Cape only the Dutch
Reformed religion was allowed. Nevertheless, a wealthy Prussian farmer,
Martin Melk--a friend of the Governor, Ryk Tulbagh--built a Lutheran
church and parsonage. Whilst the buildings were in course of erection
Melk was visited by Governor Tulbagh. “Mr. Melk,” said the Governor,
“when I pass by that church which is building I shall shut the eye
nearest it.” “Sir,” was the reply, “God Himself will close the eyes of
the man who may not look at His building.”

       *       *       *       *       *

The late Mr. “Barney” Barnato was an excellent actor. On one occasion
he was playing the part of the auctioneer in “The Octoroon” in the old
Theatre Royal, Kimberley, and in the auction scene was holding the
whole attention of the house, all silent, spell-bound. The bidding for
the octoroon progressed until the 25,000 dollars call was reached, when
the impressive silence which followed this fateful bid was broken by
the eager, excited voice of a miner in the pit who could not repress
his agitation or stay to remember that he was in a theatre: “I’ll bid
26,000 dollars.” Mr. Raymond says that the man instantly slunk back,
ashamed of his enthusiasm, and the whole house roared, but the effect
of the scene was utterly spoiled.

       *       *       *       *       *

On another occasion Barnato was playing Othello, and during the
jealousy scene with Iago, a well-known broker and rival amateur named
Benjamin Hart, seated in front, guyed him. The Othello coolly broke off
in his speech, and, coming to the footlights, looked significantly at
Hart, saying, “Benny Hart! Benny Hart! you just wait till I get through
with this; I’ll make you laugh on the other side of the mouth.” He then
coolly resumed his speech. Barnato had at that time the reputation of
being the best amateur boxer in Kimberley, and Hart did not wait. He
said he was in the habit of laughing on the right side of the mouth,
and wasn’t keen about trying the left.

       *       *       *       *       *

The following story is an illustration of the ignorance which at one
time prevailed in England regarding South Africa. A gentleman was
preparing to start for the Cape when a friend came to him and said: “As
you are going to Cape Town, you will meet my brother and perhaps you
will kindly take him a small parcel from me.” “With pleasure; where
does he reside?” “Oh! he is at Graaff Reinet, and mind you tell him
that he’s to write and let us know how he is getting on!” Now, Graaff
Reinet is nearly five hundred miles from Cape Town. It reminds one of
the Irishman who enlisted in the 93rd Regiment because he had a brother
in the 94th, and he wished to be near him!

       *       *       *       *       *

When Mr. Barnato first met Sir Henry Irving, he informed him that he
had seen him in his first performance of Matthias in “The Bells.”

“I remember I played four characters that night,” said Irving.

“No,” said Barnato, in his usual quick, impetuous manner, “you played
three.”

“Excuse me,” said Irving, “but surely you will admit that I ought to
know.”

“I don’t care whether you ought to know or not, but you played three
characters only; and I will give you, if you like, every entrance and
exit you made that night.” Barnato then proceeded to give the details
of the performance, and Irving admitted that he was right.

       *       *       *       *       *

Barnato himself gained a high reputation in Kimberley as Matthias. A
very well-known South African was making a first visit to England and
his friends, wishing to show him all the sights, booked seats for the
Lyceum on a night when Irving was producing “The Bells.” “Oh, let’s
go somewhere else,” said the colonist; “I have seen Barney Barnato as
Matthias, and I do not want to see anyone else.” Barnato told this
story to Irving, and the great actor replied: “Such is fame.”

       *       *       *       *       *

The military instinct is very strong amongst the Zulus. Bishop Colenso
was once telling a Zulu chief named Pakade that he was busy translating
the Lord’s Prayer into Zulu, and was laboriously endeavouring to
awaken the chief’s interest in the project when the latter impatiently
replied: “Yes! Yes! That is all very good, but how do you make
gunpowder?”

       *       *       *       *       *

Mr. Barnato’s biographer, Mr. Harry Raymond, says that one evening
after dinner at a well-known club an attempt was made to engage Barnato
in a game of billiards with a good player with the intention of
extracting some money from him in bets. Nothing loath--for he was fond
of the game and played well, circumstances which were not known to the
people there--an adjournment was made to the billiard-room. There every
seat was rapidly filled up to watch the expected game, and his opponent
said: “Shall we play for a fiver, Mr. Barnato?” “Yes, I don’t mind.”
Several of those present then offered each to bet him a fiver he did
not win. He gave a quick glance round, saw the eagerness for the fivers
and a share in the spoil, and, turning to a friend who was with him,
said: “Have you got any paper, Tom? Take everything they offer; I am
going to make some money to-night. Put a fiver on for yourself--I shall
win.” To the intense chagrin and disgust of the majority present, he
did win, playing a very good game, and just running out with a little
bit in hand.

       *       *       *       *       *

In the year 1825, when Mr. Nathaniel Isaacs, the famous traveller,
was in South Africa, he visited the great Zulu King Chaka. The latter
enquired about the state of the political affairs in Europe and other
parts of the world. Having been told something of the extent of the
British Dominion and the overthrow of the French Empire of Napoleon
at Waterloo, ten years before, this half-naked barbarian complacently
remarked: “Yes, I see now, there are only two great chiefs in all the
world: my brother, King George--he is King of all the Whites; and I,
Chaka--I am King of all the Blacks.”

       *       *       *       *       *

In the year 1851, Sir Harry Smith, then Governor of the Cape Colony,
visited Kaffraria, the natives there being then in an unsettled
condition. There was an old chief there named Macomo, who had always
been a friend of the British. In the presence of a large assemblage
of natives, Sir Harry placed his foot on the chief’s neck, in order
to symbolise to the natives the power of the White Man. The old chief
submitted to the humiliation, but when he raised his recumbent body
from the earth, he said to the Governor: “Until now I thought you were
a man!”

       *       *       *       *       *

Mr. Rhodes was not a church-goer, but strongly believed in religion as
an influence for good. He was much impressed by the good work done by
the Salvation Army. On one occasion, after a long interview with Mr.
Bramwell Booth, the son of General Booth, he said to him: “Ah! you and
the General are right; you have the best of me after all. I am trying
to make new countries; you are making new men.”

       *       *       *       *       *

In 1896, whilst Dr. Jameson was in England and in failing health,
Lord Grey, then Administrator of Rhodesia, received a telegram to the
effect that Groote Schuur, Rhodes’s beautiful home in Cape Town, had
been burnt down with most of its contents. Mr. Rhodes was then in
Rhodesia; but Lord Grey, knowing how intensely Mr. Rhodes was attached
to his home, shrank from breaking the news to him. At last, however,
whilst they were out riding together, Lord Grey said gently: “Well, Mr.
Rhodes, I am very sorry, but I am afraid I must give you a rather ugly
knock.” Mr. Rhodes reined up his horse, and, turning to his companion,
he exclaimed, his face livid, white and drawn with an agony of dread:
“Good heavens! out with it, man! What has happened?” “Well,” said Lord
Grey, “I am sorry to tell you that Groote Schuur was burnt down last
night.” The tense look of anguish disappeared from Rhodes’s face. He
heaved a great sigh, and exclaimed, with an inexpressible relief: “Oh,
thank God, thank God! I thought you were going to tell me Dr. Jim was
dead. The house is burnt down--well, what does that matter? We can
always rebuild the house, but if Dr. Jim had died I should never have
got over it.”

       *       *       *       *       *

Umbandine, the Swazi King, was very fond of game shooting, but growing
too stout to indulge in active exercise, he would order his Kaffirs to
drive the buck to the royal enclosure, where, from his customary seat,
he would empty his rifle amongst them. On one of these occasions the
King accidentally killed a Kaffir who had got into the line of fire,
and afterwards he fined the widow twelve oxen because her husband had
spoiled the royal sport!

       *       *       *       *       *

Before the court of a certain magistrate a Dutch-speaking witness
was giving evidence. He was of the cock-sure type of witness often
to be met with in the law courts. He had made some particularly
emphatic statement, when the magistrate said: “Don’t be so dogmatic.”
The interpreter translated the remark to the witness by telling him
in Dutch: “The magistrate says you must not be so ‘hondachtig.’”
Hondachtig is Dutch for “dog-like.”

       *       *       *       *       *

During the late war there was a Sister in the Pinetown military
hospital called Baker. On one occasion, as she was going to have a day
off, she left certain instruction with Sister H. about the patients
under her charge. These instructions were overheard by one of the
patients, who thereupon composed the following lines:--

                           SISTER’S DAY OFF.

    There once was a Sister called Baker,
    Of beds she’s an excellent maker;
      She knows temperatures, too,
      And, between me and you,
    Is of medicines an excellent shaker.

    She knows each man’s vice--how to treat it,
    And warns Sister H. how to meet it:
      “Number Two you can trust,
      But show T. a crust,
    Well, it’s a thousand to one he’ll eat it.”

    She dilates on the treatment we need,
    All our habits, our drinks, our feed:
      “I repeat, Mr. T....
      Doesn’t realise all, but
    He cannot be trusted for greed.”

    “Mr. N., however is wise,
    At the sight of eggs hard boiled he sighs,
      But eschew them I must,
      And that beautiful crust,
    For on me Sister Baker relies.”

    You may ask how we know what was said.
    The culprit there lying in bed,
      Overheard in the dark,
      The whispered remark,
    And tears of hot anger he shed.

    The moral is not far to seek,
    A crust perforates you when weak,
      While eavesdropping at night
      Is really not right,
    For its apt to raise anger and pique.

       *       *       *       *       *

During the siege of Kimberley, a certain colonel said one night at
mess: “Gentlemen, I am sorry to say we were only able to draw half our
ration in beef to-day; this joint I am carving is beef, at the other
end of the table the joint is horse; if anyone would prefer to try
it, perhaps he will carve for himself.” No one got up, so the colonel
had to carve small helpings of beef for all the mess. After they had
finished an orderly came and whispered to him, after which the colonel
said: “Oh, gentlemen, I am sorry to find I have made a mistake; I find
this was the horse, and the cow is still at the other end of the table!”

       *       *       *       *       *

Shortly after his arrival at the Diamond Fields, the late Mr. B. I.
Barnato went into partnership with Mr. Louis Cohen. They shared a hut
together, and, as both were poor, they experienced many hardships. Many
years after, when Mr. Barnato was at the height of his fame, he said to
Mr. Cohen: “Lou, I will forgive you everything we have ever differed
upon, except one.”

“What is that?”

“Why, when we slept in that hut, you used to pull our only blanket off
me every night, and I was too much afraid of you to even tell you of
it.”

       *       *       *       *       *

A certain town was, during the war, placed under martial law, and
no one could do anything without getting a permit from the military
authorities. One day in December the Provost was surprised by a little
girl coming into his office and saying: “Please, sir, may I have a
permit for Santa Claus to come to our house?”

       *       *       *       *       *

It is well known that during the war feeling amongst the Boer women was
even more intense than amongst the men. One Boer woman was heard to
urge her husband to go and fight, saying: “I can get another husband,
but I can’t get another Free State.”

       *       *       *       *       *

During the late war, a certain “Tommy” was desirous of possessing a
bullet-riddled helmet to show to his friends at home, so he started
firing from behind a big boulder on which he placed his helmet.
Of course, the helmet at once became the target for Boer bullets.
Unfortunately, not one touched the helmet, but one bullet hit the owner
of the helmet on the shoulder. “Tommy” thereupon removed the helmet
from its exposed position, and, with a look at his injured shoulder,
remarked: “That comes of cursed pride and nothing else.”

       *       *       *       *       *

A Free Stater, captured during the war, tried to impress his captor by
declaring that he was a Field Cornet. “I don’t care if you are a field
big drum,” was the reply.

       *       *       *       *       *

A certain Canadian trooper who came out here during the war was not
favourably impressed with South Africa. “If I owned Satandom and South
Africa,” said he, “I would rent out South Africa and live in Satandom.”

       *       *       *       *       *

Shortly after the occupation of Bloemfontein by Lord Roberts’s army,
Mr. Kipling visited the Free State capital. One morning at his hotel
a stranger came up to him and said: “Is it possible that I have the
honour to meet the author of ‘The Absent-Minded Beggar’?” “Yes,”
replied Mr. Kipling, “I have heard that piece played on a barrel-organ,
and I would shoot the man who wrote it if it would not be suicide.”

       *       *       *       *       *

In one of the cavalry fights in the late war, a lancer was about to
attack an old Boer, when the latter cried out: “Moe nie! moe nie!”
(Don’t, don’t). The lancer, however, not being conversant with the
taal, replied: “I don’t want your money, I want your life.”

       *       *       *       *       *

The Officer Commanding the troops at Modder River issue an order
prohibiting men from bathing in the river, and a flying sentry was
stationed there to see that the order was not disobeyed. Noticing
someone in the river, the sentry unceremoniously asked him to “clear
out,” whereupon the bather, who happened to be an officer in the
Guards, approached the bank in all his nakedness, and indignantly asked
the man: “Can’t you see I am an officer?”

       *       *       *       *       *

Mr. Barnato was one of the first on the Diamond Fields to realise that
the blue ground was far richer than the yellow surface ground, although
an opinion to the contrary was held by the majority of the diggers. In
connection with this matter (says his biographer, Mr. Harry Raymond),
Mr. Barnato used to tell the following story:--

“There was one man who, from the time I first began to know anything
of the mines, I envied. He had some of the best placed claims in
Kimberley and did splendidly until he got through the yellow ground
and struck the blue ground, the bedrock as most people believed it to
be. He was a clever man and sharp--perhaps some people would call him
‘sharper’--so he obliged a friend by finding a dumping ground in his
claims for some worthless yellow. He then sold his claims for whatever
he could get--four hundred pounds, I think it was--and cleared before
the expected storm could burst on his head. But these claims were among
the first to prove that the blue was the true diamond ground, and he
could not have bought them back for forty thousand pounds. The man is
still living, and very poor, after a life’s hard work; but, Oh! he was
so clever and so sharp! What? You suppose that I bought those claims
for the four hundred pounds? No, I am sorry to say I never had the
chance. I knew that the blue had been reached there, that the yellow
ground had been dumped in to cover up, and I wondered what was coming
next. The acts of an able man can be foreseen when his surroundings are
known, but who can fathom the folly of a fool? I would have given eight
thousand pounds for those claims, and they went to a new comer for four
hundred pounds!”

       *       *       *       *       *

An actor who visited the Rand in the early days relates the following
anecdote:--

“As we came to Johannesburg from Kimberley by coach, we met the
returning coach at some miserable stopping place with an unpronouncable
name, and found it crowded with Lionel Brough and his company. We
fraternised, of course, at once, and amongst the questions asked and
answered as to prospects of business, theatre accommodation, etc., we
learnt that Brough had with him a quantity of scenery and props which
he did not want, but had been unable to sell at Johannesburg. At that
moment Mr. “Barney” Barnato drove up on his way back to Kimberley, and
at once joined us. He was always a good friend to the profession, and
out there with the heavy travelling expenses between the mining camps,
the hard work, and the other uncertainties, we often wanted such a
friend then. When he heard of the scenery, he said: ‘Come on, Brough,
I’ll put it up to auction.’ We all adjourned to the open veld, all the
cloths and props were spread out to view, and the sale commenced. It
was one of the most amusing things I ever saw. Barnato made of it a
monologue, in the style of Charles Mathews, even to that ‘now let me
get a word in edgeways’ in ‘My Awful Dad,’ and bought in everything
himself. We all enjoyed the joke tremendously, but, to our great
surprise, he paid Brough the really good prices at which he had knocked
the lots down, and made them a present to us in the most kind manner
at the very last moment as he drove away. Many a professional has been
indebted to Barnato for personal kindness that the world will never
know of.”

       *       *       *       *       *

South Africans will no doubt be highly amused at the following
incident, related by Madame Albani in her book, “Forty Years of
Song”:--

   “I visited the famous diamond mines at Kimberley, and here I
   had an interesting experience. The Zulu miners gave me a very
   cordial reception, and after they had indulged in some native
   dances for my entertainment, one of them came up and said:
   ‘Lady, please sing.’ A chair was brought, and there, in the
   middle of the compound, with the Zulus squatting all round
   me, I sang “Home, Sweet Home.” At the end the Zulus applauded
   uproariously, and accompanied me to the gate, dancing and
   shouting like madmen. It was a most curious scene, and very
   impressive.”

       *       *       *       *       *

The following message was received by the Officer Commanding Caesar’s
Camp from the Chief of Staff:--“The General Officer Commanding has left
to visit you via Wagon Hill. He intends to resume former position as
soon as _dead_ and _wounded_ are buried, but will strengthen
Caesar’s Camp by Rifle Brigade.”

       *       *       *       *       *

Until the last Mr. Rhodes held the opinion that there would be no war.
It was on account of this that his brother, Colonel Frank Rhodes,
sent the following message to him on Christmas Day, 1899, when Mr.
Rhodes was amongst the besieged in Kimberley:--“Happy Christmas! How
thoroughly you misunderstood the situation!”

       *       *       *       *       *

During the military operations in connection with the siege of
Ladysmith, a letter was found on a captured Boer prisoner--apparently
from a daughter in Ladysmith--which contained the following:--

                              PROGRAMME.

                      SIEGE THEATRE OF VARIETIES,
                              LADYSMITH.

                    SECOND GRAND PROMENADE CONCERT.

              Under the auspices of the Naval Volunteers,
                     Tuesday, December 25th, 1899.
                Under the Booming Patronage and in the
                              presence of
                             “SILENT SUE.”
                            “BULWAN BILL.”
                              “POM POM.”
                            “WEARY WILLIE.”
              And others who, since last concert--through
                     circumstances over which they
                 had no control--are unable to take an
                             active part.
                   Concert to commence at 7.45 p.m.
                         Bunny Holes at 9.45.

       *       *       *       *       *

One morning, when going along to a race meeting, the late Mr. Barnato
struck up an acquaintance with a man at the starting station, had
a drink with him, and then in the crush for the train they were
separated. He got into a carriage with three of the “sharp” fraternity,
who marked him for their own. Arrived at their destination, his first
acquaintance saw the party get out of the carriage, and, coming hastily
up to one of them, said:--“Here, you leave him alone; he is my bird.”

“Oh! he is, is he?” was the rejoinder. “Well, you are welcome to him,
for he got all our money.” Before reaching the course, Barnato returned
the sharps their money, saying: “Here, it is bad enough for you chaps
to have lost your railway fare. I don’t want your money, but don’t mark
Barney Barnato down for a mug again.”

       *       *       *       *       *

In the early days of the Diamond Fields, when the evils resulting from
an uncontrolled supply of liquor to natives were rampant, the following
lines appeared in a Kimberley paper:

    The best of all methods, so others maintain,
      To free them from ignorance’s yoke,
    And enable them civilised freedom to gain,
      Is simply to give them Cape Smoke;
    When mixed with tobacco, red pepper and lime,
      With dagga and vitriol, too,
    The draught is delicious, enchanting, sublime,
      Why, it even would civilise _you_:

       *       *       *       *       *

In order to evade the I.D.B. Laws, it was the custom among the buyers
in Kimberley to give a “reward” of 25 per cent. to their native
servants for each diamond they brought as a reputed find while working,
“which,” as Dr. J. W. Matthews says in his book, “Incwadi Yami,” “was,
of course, merely another mode of buying from natives without fear
of detection.” This custom gave rise to the following lines, which
appeared in a Kimberley paper some forty years ago:--

    I would not be a digger. No,
        Nor yet an I.D.B.
    In digging oft your moneys go,
        The other’s felony.
    But then, upon the other hand,
        I should be quite content
    If I only was a nigger, and
        Got 25 per cent.

    I’d not be a shareholder, or
        Hold Atlas’s or Frere’s;
    I am not even pining for
        The scrip of great De Beer’s.
    In Kimberley the debts expand,
        The loan, it isn’t lent;
    So I’d rather be a nigger, and
        Get 25 per cent.

    I would not be a Chairman, or
        Director of a Board,
    For then I could not buy nice pipes,
        Nor good Cape Smoke afford;
    I might get nasty writs perhaps
        When all my coin was spent:
    I’d rather be a nigger, and
        Get 25 per cent.

    I wouldn’t be a Searcher, and
        I wouldn’t be the Chief;
    I wouldn’t hold the contract for
        Removal of the reef;
    I wouldn’t be Izdebski, and
        I wouldn’t crime prevent;
    I’d rather be a nigger, and
        Get 25 per cent.

    I wouldn’t be a Secretary
        nor a Manager,
    To be a toiling Overseer
        I’d very much demur;
    I wouldn’t build a crusher,
        Nor such paltry things prevent;
    I’d rather be a nigger, and
        Get 25 per cent.

    I wouldn’t be proprietor
        Of far-famed Kamfer’s Dam,
    Nor even Chairman of the French,
        For all’s not real jam.
    I’d scarcely purchase Centrals,
        But I never would repent
    If only I was a nigger, and
        Got 25 per cent.

    I would not be an Hemporor,
        I wouldn’t be a King,
    I wouldn’t be a Hadmiral,
        Or hany sich a thing;
    I wouldn’t be in Lowe’s Police
        And live inside a tent;
    I’d rather be a nigger, and
        Get 25 per cent.

       *       *       *       *       *

In 1882, on account of the proximity of the Free State border to the
Diamond Fields, a very stringent law was passed in that State to
suppress illicit diamond buying. The judges, however, interpreted the
law not to extend beyond six miles from proclaimed diamond diggings.
This inspired a local poet to write as follows:--

    Over the Free State line
    Whatever is yours is mine.
        If I’ve a stone,
        It’s all my own,
    No John Fry shall make me groan
        Over the Free State line,
    I’ll never have cause to pine,
    The I.D.B. is happy and free
        Over the Free State line.

       *       *       *       *       *

In the early days of the Diamond Fields when many made fortunes by
illicit diamond buying, the following song was most popular in the
Kimberley music-halls:--

    I’m shortly about to retire,
      Then to Flo, of course, I’ll be wed,
    I shall do the thing fine, buy shares in a mine,
      Or else float a company instead.
    I’ll, of course, have a carriage and pair,
      And later I shall not despair,
    In the council I’ll get, and if _you_ wait a bit,
      No doubt you will see me made mayor.

       *       *       *       *       *

The feeling of indignation which the retrocession of the Transvaal,
after the defeat at Majuba, gave rise amongst the British colonists
found expression in the following notice, posted up outside a hotel in
Ladysmith:--

                        Sacred to the Memory of
                                HONOUR,
                    The beloved wife of John Bull.
                  She died in the Transvaal, and was
                   buried at Candahar, March, 1881.
                          Her end was PEACE.

       *       *       *       *       *

A farmer called at a certain magistrate’s office to ask for a permit
to move cattle. Whilst the permit was being written out the farmer sat
down in the office and began to expectorate upon the floor. “Dirty
beast!” muttered the official. “Nie, nie,” interposed the farmer, “nie,
dertig beeste nie, maar twentig.” (No, no, not thirty cattle, only
twenty.)

       *       *       *       *       *

When Cecil Rhodes died there were some friends of Sir Abe Bailey who
declared that the mantle of Rhodes had descended to Abe Bailey. About
this time, Mr. Samuel Marks met Sir Abe Bailey and said to him: “What’s
this I hear about you having taken over Rhodes’s mantle?” “Well,”
replied Sir Abe, “they are good enough to say so.” “Take my advice,
then,” replied Mr. Marks, “and leave it alone. I’ve dealt in old
clothes myself, and know they don’t always fit.”

       *       *       *       *       *

At Stellenbosch everybody sleeps in the afternoon. Many years ago a
Stellenbosch burgher consulted his physician for insomnia. “At what
hour of the night do you suffer most?” asked the doctor. “Oh, it is not
in the night that I suffer,” was the reply. “I sleep well at night; but
I sometimes find it difficult to get my full afternoon’s sleep.”

       *       *       *       *       *

An amusing incident is related by Sir Henry Juta, K.C., arising out of
the similarity of the Dutch word “keuken,” meaning kitchen, and the
Afrikaans word “kuiken,” meaning chicken. Sir Henry and some other
barristers were on circuit, and were dining at a Dutch farm house. The
hostess apologised for the dinner not being all that it should have
been owing to something having gone wrong with the culinary department.
Sir Henry said to her:--“Het spijt mij, mevrouw, te hooren dat daar
iets met de keuken makeert.” (“I am sorry to hear, madam, that there
is something wrong with the ‘keuken’ (kitchen).” The lady folded her
arms and drew herself up, and said, coldly:--“Nie, meneer Juta, met die
kuikens makeer daar nix nie.” (“No, Mr. Juta, there is nothing wrong
with the chickens.”) Apparently chickens formed part of the _menu_.

       *       *       *       *       *

Sir Theophilus Shepstone related the following story. In 1835,
Colonel--afterwards Sir Harry--Smith, when commanding the troops in
Grahamstown, always read part of the service on Sunday morning, and
was so particular that all should come that he imposed a fine of
half-a-crown on every absentee. He read extremely well, and was very
proud of it. One Sunday a dog came into the room where the service was
going on and began to create a disturbance. Colonel Smith stood it for
a little while; then, in the middle of a prayer, said suddenly: “Take
that d----d dog away,” after which he continued his prayer in the same
tone as before.

       *       *       *       *       *

In the early fifties, when Lord Grey was Secretary of State for the
Colonies, the unpopularity of his policy amongst all sections in South
Africa gave rise to the following epigram:--

    This point was long disputed at the Cape,
    What was the devil’s colour and his shape.
    The Hottentots, of course, declared him white;
    The Englishman pronounced him black as night.
    But now they split the difference, and say,
    Beyond all question that Old Nick is Grey.

       *       *       *       *       *

Once President Kruger was one of a party amongst whom a competition
arose as to who could tell the tallest yarn. This is the yarn the
President related:--“I was outspanned with my wife and family by the
banks of a river, when some elephants came down in the cool of the
evening to drink. One of them, while engaged in quenching his thirst,
had his trunk seized by a crocodile. The sagacious animal immediately
withdrew from the water, the crocodile maintaining its hold. Two other
elephants belonging to the troop formed up, the one on the right, the
other on the left of the attacked animal, and proceeded until they came
to a spot where two trees had grown close together. The one elephant
then pulled the nearest tree towards him, and his fellow, the parallel
one, while the wounded animal deposited the crocodile between the
trunks. The trees swung together, causing the crocodile to release its
hold, and it was left to do the best it could for itself.”

When the President had told his tale, another of the party gave the
following shooting yarn:--The family were on trek and had been very
unfortunate in the pursuit of game, which was scarce. They were without
meat, and the father decided to have a look round for himself. The
shades of evening were falling when he secured a fat buck, and promptly
returned home. Amid the murmurs of congratulation from the others were
naturally many enquiries as to how he had shot it. He explained that
the buck was just going over a rise into a dip, when he fired and
bowled it over. To his surprise, he found that the bullet had entered
the hoof, passed right through the leg, then through the back and head,
and emerged at the right eye. The President had to admit that his tale
had been fairly capped.

       *       *       *       *       *

In the early days of the Rand Gold Fields the Transvaal Government
generously granted four stands to each of the various Christian
denominations for the erection of places of worship. The Jewish
community, however, received only two stands. At this the Jews felt
aggrieved, and a deputation was sent to Pretoria to interview President
Kruger with a view to getting the grievance removed. The President
listened attentively to the deputation, then shook his head and
said:--“No, I don’t think you have a legitimate grievance. You see, you
only believe in half the Bible, so it is only right you should have
half the number of stands. When you accept the other half of the Bible,
I shall be glad to let you have two more stands.”

       *       *       *       *       *

When Sir Thomas Upington was practising at the Bar, he came into Court
one day during the progress of a cattle-stealing case. The skins of the
stolen cattle had all been produced in Court, and as they were several
weeks old it made the atmosphere of the Court rather stuffy. Sir Thomas
sniffed a bit and then said, _sotto voce_: “I suppose its all
those rotten judgments.”

       *       *       *       *       *

Sir Henry Juta (“Reminiscences of the Western Circuit”) says that the
following incident actually happened. A girl married a rich farmer,
who died some six months after, and as the couple had been married
in community of property, she was left a wealthy widow. According
to the usual practice, she was present at his funeral, and as they
were returning from the graveside a former admirer approached her and
proposed that they should make one flock of their sheep and goats,
_i.e._, marry. The fair widow replied with much feeling:--“Dit
spijt, mij Jan, maar toe ons naar de begrafenis gegaan het ik het ver
Piet Potgieter mij jaawoord gegee.” (“I am sorry, John, but as we
went to the funeral I gave my promise (literally, yes-word) to Piet
Potgieter.”) Sir Henry Juta adds that this story, like so many others,
has been subjected to emendation. It now runs that the executor of
her husband’s estate proposed to her when returning from the funeral,
and the widow replied that going to it she had become engaged to the
undertaker.

       *       *       *       *       *

Many years ago a certain farmer in the Cape Colony engaged an overseer.
The latter was an excellent worker, but was more intimate with the
farmer’s wife than the farmer thought proper, having often found them
sitting together on the sofa. The farmer then went to the magistrate
for advice. “You should give your wife a good talking to,” advised the
magistrate. The farmer only too well knew the futility of acting on
this advice, and said so. “Well, then,” said the magistrate, “get rid
of the overseer.” “That I can’t do,” objected the farmer, “because he
is such a good worker.” A few weeks later the magistrate met the farmer
again, and, noticing the happy expression on his countenance, remarked:
“Ah, so you’ve got rid of the overseer.” “Nie,” replied the farmer,
with a look of expressive contempt for the magistrate’s brains, “ik het
de sofa verkoopt.” (“No, I have sold the sofa.”)

       *       *       *       *       *

Two sons jointly inherited a farm from their father. They worked it
together for some time, then a disagreement arose between them and
they decided to divide the farm. They could not, however, agree as to
the manner of division, and, after much argument, they decided to
submit their case to the arbitration of President Kruger. The President
listened attentively to all the points raised by each of the brothers,
and then gave the following decision:--“You, Jan, the elder, shall
divide the farm in two portions; and you, Piet, the younger, shall have
the first choice as to which portion you will take.”

  [Illustration]


Transcriber’s Notes:

Obvious printers’, punctuation and spelling errors have been corrected
silently.
